COINS
=====
Concise Online INteraction System
---------------------------------

Coins is a gameplay system based on coin tosses.  All game outcomes
depend on tossing coins.  Here is an example:

Stephen's character, KrumpKlownX7, wants to hack his way into a
government database.  This is a 4h task, which means Stephen needs to
toss 4 heads to succeed.  KrumpKlownX7 is an experienced hacker (heck,
he is probably 75% cybernetic) and so has over his carreer accumated 8
coins for his hacking skill.  He throws his coins and gets:

    heads
    tails
    heads
    headsx
    tails
    tails
    heads
    heads

Five heads and three tails.  He succeeds in hacking into the system!

All skill and ability based outcomes are mediated in this way.  

Attack/Defense
--------------

Weapons and armor modify the outcome, but not the success/failure
rates of attacks and defense rolls (unless specifically indicated
otherwise on a particular armor or weapon).  Coins are distributed
onto specific weapon abilities rather than an "attack" stat.  Suppose
Wolverine, Marlin's character, wants to attack a watermelon with his
claws.  He has 12 claw attack coins, and the GM determines he is
within range to attack the melon.  He throws his coins:

    tails
    heads
    heads
    heads
    heads
    heads
    tails
    heads
    heads
    heads
    tails
    heads

So he rolls 9 heads, and his claws are made of Adimantium, so he gets
a +1 attack, giving a damage of 10.  The watermelon has only 3 hit
points, and so it is defeated.

Suppose instead that the watermelon was wearing steel armor, and the
watermelon had devoted 4 coins to heavy armor.  If the watermelon
chose to defend, he might roll:

    tails
    tails
    heads
    heads

Two heads.  He succeeds in blocking 2 points of damage.  Steal armor
has a plus one permanent defense point which is activated if the
watermelon chooses to defend and rolls ANY heads at all, so in this
scenario, three of Wolverine's damage points would be blocked.  Alas,
this is insufficient to block enough damage to prevent death.  The
watermelon is still defeated.

Character Creation
------------------

Characters start out with 10 coins to distribute into any skills they
wish.  They should cooperate with the GM in determining which skills
are appropriate for a given campaign setting.  Skills should be
reasonably generalizable.  A character who is an expert computer
hacker might be able to use some of his computer hacking coins to
solve an electronics problem, for instance.  Or an expert
shortswordsman might wield a kendo pole or stave with diminished, but
still skillful, expertise.  The system is there to be worked with, not
against.

Hit points represent the total vitality of the character.  A coin can
be converted into 3 hit points instead of being used for a skill,
although no more than three coins can be used this way, and hit points
should not exceed twenty without specific exceptions being made.

The GM and a player may decide that some skills require a "pool," like
magic points.  Under these circumstances, coins can be contributed to
that pool in the same manner as hit points.  

Leveling
--------

At appropriate times, the GM can award coins to the players.  These
can be specific to certain skills or "general coins" which can be used
to extend or learn new skills or increase hit points.  

"Hail Mary" Skill Tests
-----------------------

Players may attempt, at the discretion of the GM, to perform a feat
which they do not have coins for, or for which they do not have enough
coins.  In these cases, they may throw the number of coins they do
have, and then they must throw coins equal to the number of remaining
points they need to succeed plus one, acheiving heads for all.
Success represents a miraculous or lucky outcome.

For example, Stephen's character, "Da NyteTyme" encounters a cyber
samurai assassin sent by his enemies to thwart his latest bank heist.
Luckily, Da NyteTyme has seen the samurai coming from a rooftop
vantage point.  His partner, a sniper, is injured, and cannot shoot,
but Da NyteTyme decides to attempt an assassination shot.  The GM
determines that the shot has a difficulty of 4 coins.  Da NyteTyme has
no sniper coins, but can manage an assault weapon with 4 coins.  The
GM decides he can use one coin in his attempt.  Da NyteTyme rolls
`heads` for this toss.  Now he must make 4 additional coin throws, all
heads.  The first toss lowered the difficulty by one, and he now needs
3+1 more heads to succeed.  

Da NyteTyme rolls 4 heads, and miraculously blows the head off the
samurai, in a rain of blood and metal.

However, if the first beyond-skill toss is tails, you fail in some
spectacular way determined by the GM.

Luck
----

Characters have a luck pool which is initially empty.  When they
receive an upgrade/experience coin, they may choose NOT to use it, and
to add it to the luck pool.  A coin from the luck pool can be used
ONCE to force a coin flip to heads.  Luck coins may be awarded by the
GM for dramatic and/or quest related purposes.  

Conclusion
----------

That is it.  Play flexible/fair!
